---
class_code: stat4010
---
# The F Test

Don't do simultaneous t-tests; probability of Type I error increases.

Start with $\chi^2(n) = \Gamma(\frac n2, \frac12)$ distribution. $\chi^2(n)$ arises from having $Z_1,Z_2,\dots,Z_n\overset{iid}{\sim} N(0,1)$. Then:

\\[\sum_{i=1}^nZ_i^2\sim\chi^2(n)\\]

Also if $X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n \overset{i}{\sim} N(\mu_i, \sigma_i^2)$ then:

\\[\sum_{i=1}^n\left(\frac{X_i-\mu_i}{\sigma_i}\right)^2\sim\chi^2(n)\\]

Also if $X_i \overset{iid}{\sim} N(\mu, \sigma^2)$ then:

\\[\frac{\sum_i(x_i-\overline x)^2}{\sigma^2}\sim\chi^2(n-1)\\]

(we lost a degree of freedom by estimating $\overline x$).

__F Distribution:__ let $X_1\sim \chi^2(d_1)$ and $X_2\sim\chi^2(d_2)$. Then:

\\[X = \frac{X_1/d_1}{X_2/d_2} \sim F_{d_1,d_2}\\]

The F distribution is a ratio of $\chi^2$ distributions.

Consider a full model $\Omega: y_i=\beta_0+\beta_1x_{i,1}+\dots+\beta_px_{i,p}+\epsilon_i$, and a reduced model $\omega: y_i = \beta_0^\prime+\beta_1^\prime x_{i,1} + \dots+\beta_q^\prime x_{i,q} + \epsilon_i$.

The Predictors in the reduced model are a strict subset of the predictors in the full model.

Construct F-Statistic:

\\[F = \frac{(RSS_\omega - RSS_\Omega)/(p-q)}{RSS_\Omega/(n-(p+1))}\sim F_{p-q, n-(p+1)}\\]

The full F test:
- $H_0$: $\omega$ is sufficient, $F$ is small.
- $H_1$: $\omega$ is insufficient, $F$ has small p-value.

$H_1$ implies we should use at least one of the $\beta$ that wasn't included in the reduced model.

__Full F-test:__ $\omega$ is $y_i = \beta_0 + \epsilon$.

__Partial F-test:__ $\omega$ is more interesting than that.

Confidence interval of $\hat{\beta_j}$:

\\[\hat{\beta_j} \pm t_{\alpha/2}(n-(p+1))\cdot\widehat{s.e.}(\hat{\beta_j})\\]

Where $\widehat{s.e.}(\hat{\beta_j}) = \sqrt{\hat\sigma^2[(X^TX)^{-1}]_{jj}}$.